Update .NET manual instrumentation docs with example app (#3834)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/languages/net/instrumentation.md

{{% docs/languages/manual-intro %}}

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}

On this page you will learn how you can add traces, metrics and logs to your
code manually. You are not limited to using one kind of instrumentation:
you can also use [automatic instrumentation](/docs/languages/net/automatic/)

> to get started and then enrich your code with manual instrumentation as needed.

Reviewer: confirm with auto-instrumentation owners, that it is feasible to have auto-instrumentation and enrichment via manual at the same time.

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/manual-instrumentation.md

Also, for libraries your code depends on, you don't have to write

> instrumentation code yourself, since they might come with OpenTelemetry

Reviewer 3: Minor, I find "come with OpenTelemetry" a bit confusing, consider:

"since they might be already instrumented or there are instrumentation libraries for them"

> On this page you will learn how you can add traces, metrics and logs to your
> code _manually_. But, you are not limited to only use one kind of
> instrumentation: use [automatic instrumentation](/docs/languages/net/automatic/)
> to get started and then enrich your code with manual instrumentation as needed.
> 
> Also, for libraries your code depends on, you don't have to write
> instrumentation code yourself, since they might come with OpenTelemetry built-in
> _natively_ or you can make use of
> [instrumentation libraries](/docs/languages/net/libraries/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
On this page you will learn how you can add traces, metrics and logs to your
code manually. You are not limited to using one kind of instrumentation:
you can also use [automatic instrumentation](/docs/languages/net/automatic/)
to get started and then enrich your code with manual instrumentation as needed.

Also, for libraries your code depends on, you don't have to write
instrumentation code yourself, since they might come with OpenTelemetry
or you can make use of
[instrumentation libraries](/docs/languages/net/libraries/).
```

@svrnm Not sure if the include has the same wording everywhere, but it shouldn't use italics for emphasis.

Author: Yes, it is the same wording everywhere (currently js and java) I just changed the references for .Net where necessary.

If you prefer to use OpenTelemetry APIs instead of `System.Diagnostics` APIs,
you can refer to the [OpenTelemetry API Shim docs for tracing](../shim).

## Example app preparation {#example-app}

This page uses a modified version of the example app from
[Getting Started](/docs/languages/net/getting-started/) to help you learn
about manual instrumentation.

You don't have to use the example app: if you want to instrument your own app or
library, follow the instructions here to adapt the process to your own code.

> ### Dependencies {#example-app-dependencies}

Reviewer 3: Maybe use "Prerequisites"

[OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore)

```sh
dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore
```

### Initialize the SDK

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library, you don't need to initialize the SDK. {{% /alert %}}

It is important to configure an instance of the OpenTelemetry SDK as early as possible in your application.

To initialize the OpenTelemetry SDK for an ASP.NET Core app like in the case of the example app, 
update the content of the `Program.cs` file with the following code: 

```csharp
using OpenTelemetry.Logs;
using OpenTelemetry.Metrics;
using OpenTelemetry.Resources;
using OpenTelemetry.Trace;

// Ideally, you will want this name to come from a config file, constants file, etc.
var serviceName = "dice-server";
var serviceVersion = "1.0.0";

var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.Services.AddOpenTelemetry()
    .ConfigureResource(resource => resource.AddService(
        serviceName: serviceName,
        serviceVersion: serviceVersion))
    .WithTracing(tracing => tracing

>         .AddSource(serviceName)

Reviewer: AddSource should be using the name of the `ActivitySource`. In this example, it just happens that both service name and activitysource name are the same, but i'd recommend to explicitly make them same by calling something like AddSource(Instrumentation.ActivitySource.Name)

elements.

It’s generally recommended to define `ActivitySource` once per app/service that is been instrumented, but you can instantiate several `ActivitySource`s if that suits your scenario.

In the case of the example app, we will create a new file `Instrumentation.cs` as a custom type to hold reference for the ActivitySource. 

```csharp
using System.Diagnostics;

/// <summary>
/// It is recommended to use a custom type to hold references for ActivitySource. 
/// This avoids possible type collisions with other components in the DI container.
/// </summary>
public class Instrumentation : IDisposable
{
    internal const string ActivitySourceName = "dice-server";
    internal const string ActivitySourceVersion = "1.0.0";

    public Instrumentation()
    {
        this.ActivitySource = new ActivitySource(ActivitySourceName, ActivitySourceVersion);
    }

    public ActivitySource ActivitySource { get; }

    public void Dispose()
    {
        this.ActivitySource.Dispose();
    }
}
```

Then we will update the `Program.cs` to add the Instrument object as a dependency injection:

```csharp 
//...

// Register the ActivitySource as a singleton in the DI container.

> // Create a service to expose the ActivitySource Instruments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Create a service to expose the ActivitySource.
```

Unless you plan to add metric instruments as well to Instrumentation.cs?

Author: Removed that line and updated the above comment.

```csharp
public List<int> rollTheDice(int rolls)
{   
    List<int> results = new List<int>();
    
    // It is recommended to create activities, only when doing operations that are worth measuring independently. 
    // Too many activities makes it harder to visualize in tools like Jaeger.
    using (var myActivity = activitySource.StartActivity("rollTheDice"))
    {
        for (int i = 0; i < rolls; i++)
        {
            results.Add(rollOnce());
        }

        return results;
    }
}

```
If you followed the instructions using the [example app](#example-app) up to
this point, you can copy the code above in your library file `Dice.cs`. You
should now be able to see activities/spans emitted from your app.

Start your app as follows, and then send it requests by visiting <http://localhost:8080/rolldice?rolls=12> with your browser or curl.

```sh
dotnet run
```

After a while, you should see the spans printed in the console by the
`ConsoleExporter`, something like this:

```json
Activity.TraceId:            841d70616c883db82b4ae4e11c728636
Activity.SpanId:             9edfe4d69b0d6d8b
Activity.TraceFlags:         Recorded

> Activity.ParentSpanId:       39fcd105cf958377

Reviewer: given this is the child Activity, would it better to show the parent activity also here.

Activity.ActivitySourceName: dice-server
Activity.DisplayName:        rollTheDice
Activity.Kind:               Internal
Activity.StartTime:          2024-04-10T15:24:00.3620354Z
Activity.Duration:           00:00:00.0144329
Resource associated with Activity:
    service.name: dice-server
    service.version: 1.0.0
    service.instance.id: 7a7a134f-3178-4ac6-9625-96df77cff8b4
    telemetry.sdk.name: opentelemetry
    telemetry.sdk.language: dotnet
    telemetry.sdk.version: 1.7.0

```

### Create nested Activities
Nested [spans](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans) let you track work that's
nested in nature. For example, the `rollOnce()` function below represents a
nested operation. The following sample creates a nested span that tracks
`rollOnce()`:

```csharp
private int rollOnce()
{
    using (var childActivity = activitySource.StartActivity("rollOnce"))
    {
      int result;
      
      result = Random.Shared.Next(min, max + 1);
        
      return result;
    }
}

```

> When you view the spans in a trace visualization tool, `rollOnce` childActivity will be

Reviewer: for demonstrating the idea of child spans, this is very good! I'd also want to keep adequate warning here for users to avoid too much activity, as that'll expensive, but more importantly - makes visualization harder.

tracked as a nested operation under `rollTheDice` activity.

### Get the current Activity

> Sometimes it’s helpful to do something with the current/active span at a particular point in program execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes it’s helpful to do something with the current/active Activity/Span at a particular point in program execution.
```

```csharp
var activity = Activity.Current;
```

### Activity Tags

Tags (the equivalent of [Attributes](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#attributes)) let you attach key/value
pairs to an [`Activity`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans) so it carries more
information about the current operation that it's tracking.

```csharp
private int rollOnce()
{
  using (var childActivity = activitySource.StartActivity("rollOnce"))
    {
      int result;
      
      result = Random.Shared.Next(min, max + 1);
      childActivity?.SetTag("dicelib.rolled", result);
        
      return result;
    } 
}
```

> ### Create Activities with events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add Events to Activities
```

If you prefer to use OpenTelemetry APIs instead of `System.Diagnostics` APIs,
you can refer to the [OpenTelemetry API Shim docs for tracing](../shim).

## Example app preparation {#example-app}

This page uses a modified version of the example app from
[Getting Started](/docs/languages/net/getting-started/) to help you learn
about manual instrumentation.

You don't have to use the example app: if you want to instrument your own app or
library, follow the instructions here to adapt the process to your own code.

### Dependencies {#example-app-dependencies}

- [.NET SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet) 6+

> ### Create and launch an HTTP Server
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Create and launch an HTTP Server

To begin, set up an environment in a new directory called `dotnet-otel-example`. Within that directory, execute following command:

```shell
dotnet new web
```
```

/*DiceController.cs*/
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
using System.Net;

public class DiceController : ControllerBase
{
    private ILogger<DiceController> logger;

    public DiceController(ILogger<DiceController> logger)
    {
        this.logger = logger;
    }

    [HttpGet("/rolldice")]
    public List<int> RollDice(string player, int? rolls)
    {
        if(!rolls.HasValue)
        {
            logger.LogError("Missing rolls parameter");
            throw new HttpRequestException("Missing rolls parameter", null, HttpStatusCode.BadRequest);
        }
            
        var result = new Dice(1, 6).rollTheDice(rolls.Value);

        if (string.IsNullOrEmpty(player))
        {
            logger.LogInformation("Anonymous player is rolling the dice: {result}", result);
        }
        else
        {
            logger.LogInformation("{player} is rolling the dice: {result}", player, result);
        }

        return result;
    }
}

```

Replace the content of the Program.cs file with the following code:

```csharp
var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();

app.MapControllers();

app.Run();
```

> 

Reviewer 5: ~~~suggestion

In the `Properties` subdirectory, replace the content of `launchSettings.json` with the following:

```json
{
  "$schema": "http://json.schemastore.org/launchsettings.json",
  "profiles": {
    "http": {
      "commandName": "Project",
      "dotnetRunMessages": true,
      "launchBrowser": true,
      "applicationUrl": "http://localhost:8080",
      "environmentVariables": {
        "ASPNETCORE_ENVIRONMENT": "Development"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

~~~

To ensure that it is working, run the application with the following command and
open <http://localhost:8080/rolldice?rolls=12> in your web browser:

```sh
dotnet run
```

You should get a list of 12 numbers in your browser window, for example:

```text
[5,6,5,3,6,1,2,5,4,4,2,4]
```

## Manual instrumentation setup

### Dependencies

Install the following OpenTelemetry NuGet packages:

[OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console)

> [OpenTelemetry.Extensions.Hosting](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OpenTelemetry.Extensions.Hosting)

Reviewer 5: @cijothomas similar to the PR on exporters, I assume also here the Extensions.Hosting is only for ASP.NET core?

Reviewer 6: Hosting is for anything that can take BackgroundServices and Dependency Injection, so you can use that with console apps.

```sh
dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console
dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Extensions.Hosting
```

For ASP.NET Core-based applications, also install the AspNetCore instrumentation package

[OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore)

```sh
dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore
```

### Initialize the SDK

> {{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library,  you dont need to initialize the SDK. {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library, you dont need to initialize the SDK. {{% /alert %}}
```

It is important to configure an instance of the OpenTelemetry SDK as early as possible in your application.

To initialize the OpenTelemetry SDK for an ASP.NET Core app like in the case of the example app, 

> replace the content of the program.cs file with the following code: 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
update the content of the `Program.cs` file with the following code: 
```

```csharp
using OpenTelemetry.Logs;
using OpenTelemetry.Metrics;
using OpenTelemetry.Resources;
using OpenTelemetry.Trace;

// Ideally, you will want this name to come from a config file, constants file, etc.

> var serviceName = "Dice.*";

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
var serviceName = "dice-server";
```

Author: @svrnm if we change this "dice-server" then the name to create the ActivitySource for both the server and the lib will have to be "dice-server" as well.

Reviewer 5: let me double check on that, might be that .NET behaves here differently compared to other languages

Reviewer 5: Ok... so if I understand it correctle then, the ActivitySource name should be the instrumentation scope name, not the service name, so they should be different.

Reviewer 5: @open-telemetry/dotnet-approvers please take a look, I am no expert on that matter here, might be my misunderstanding

Reviewer 6: ActivitySource == Tracer
Activity == Span

Since it's normally 1 tracer per app, I'd say `dice-server` is fine?

app, split out the dice rolling into a library file, which then will be
imported as a dependency by the app file.

Create the library file named `Dice.cs` and add the following code to it:

```csharp
/*Dice.cs*/

public class Dice
{
    private int min;
    private int max;

    public Dice(int min, int max)
    {
        this.min = min;
        this.max = max;
    }

    public List<int> rollTheDice(int rolls)
    {
        List<int> results = new List<int>();

        for (int i = 0; i < rolls; i++)
        {
            results.Add(rollOnce());
        }
        
        return results;
    }

    private int rollOnce()
    {
        return Random.Shared.Next(min, max + 1);
    }
}

```

Create the app file `DiceController.cs` and add the following code to it:

```csharp
/*DiceController.cs*/
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
using System.Net;

public class DiceController : ControllerBase
{
    private ILogger<DiceController> logger;

    public DiceController(ILogger<DiceController> logger)
    {
        this.logger = logger;
    }

    [HttpGet("/rolldice")]
    public List<int> RollDice(string player, int? rolls)
    {
        if(!rolls.HasValue)
        {

>             logger.LogError("Missing rolls parameter");

Reviewer 3: Avoid using extension methods from LoggerExtension, use [compile-time logging source generation](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/extensions/logger-message-generator) pattern to achieve the best performance.

Check https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/docs/logs#use-logger

Reviewer 6: While in general I agree, I don't think that's a widespread enough methodology at the moment, and would take away from what this example is trying to achieve.

Using `ILogger` in the way this example does will be familiar to enough people that it won't cause them to learn something new.

Author: @reyang could we address the use of OpenTelemetry .NET Log practices in the Logs section, which will be added in another PR?

            throw new HttpRequestException("Missing rolls parameter", null, HttpStatusCode.BadRequest);
        }
            
        var result = new Dice(1, 6).rollTheDice(rolls.Value);

        if (string.IsNullOrEmpty(player))
        {
            logger.LogInformation("Anonymous player is rolling the dice: {result}", result);
        }
        else
        {
            logger.LogInformation("{player} is rolling the dice: {result}", player, result);
        }

        return result;
    }
}

```

Replace the content of the Program.cs file with the following code:

```csharp
var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();

app.MapControllers();

app.Run();
```

> In the `Properties` subdirectory, replace the content of `launchSettings.json` with the following:

Reviewer 6: I agree that we shouldn't include this as it's purpose is only to ensure that we get a consistent port number. I don't think either is best practice for what it's worth Reiley, and I don't think that tone helps at all.

> In the `Properties` subdirectory, replace the content of `launchSettings.json` with the following:

Author: This was copied from the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/net/getting-started/#example-application 
As this PR is building on top of that...

> In the `Properties` subdirectory, replace the content of `launchSettings.json` with the following:

Reviewer 5: Let's follow up on this in a separate discussion

```json
{
  "$schema": "http://json.schemastore.org/launchsettings.json",
  "profiles": {
    "http": {

>       "commandName": "Project",

Author: Same comment as above

Install the following OpenTelemetry NuGet packages:

[OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console)

[OpenTelemetry.Extensions.Hosting](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OpenTelemetry.Extensions.Hosting)

```sh
dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console
dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Extensions.Hosting
```

For ASP.NET Core-based applications, also install the AspNetCore instrumentation package

[OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore)

```sh
dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore
```

### Initialize the SDK

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library, you don't need to initialize the SDK. {{% /alert %}}

It is important to configure an instance of the OpenTelemetry SDK as early as possible in your application.

To initialize the OpenTelemetry SDK for an ASP.NET Core app like in the case of the example app, 
update the content of the `Program.cs` file with the following code: 

```csharp
using OpenTelemetry.Logs;
using OpenTelemetry.Metrics;
using OpenTelemetry.Resources;
using OpenTelemetry.Trace;

> // Ideally, you will want this name to come from a config file, constants file, etc.

Reviewer 6: Because environment variables are the preferred way of configuring Otel, and constants would be a better way to achieve this if it's in code.

That said, I'm not sure commenting the code like this in the getting-started example in the Markdown is worthwhile as it will cause the reader to think about too much.

> // Ideally, you will want this name to come from a config file, constants file, etc.

Reviewer 5: resolving this conversation now as well to merge in this PR, we can have a follow up discussion on that.

var serviceName = "dice-server";
var serviceVersion = "1.0.0";

var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.Services.AddOpenTelemetry()
    .ConfigureResource(resource => resource.AddService(
        serviceName: serviceName,
        serviceVersion: serviceVersion))
    .WithTracing(tracing => tracing
        .AddSource(serviceName)
        .AddAspNetCoreInstrumentation()

>         .AddConsoleExporter())

Reviewer 6: I don't think that's needed for the getting started docs. We have a standard across all docs that Hope is trying to mirror, not specific to .NET, so I think it's fine to not say that.

>         .AddConsoleExporter())

Author: We also included this note in line 305/306 below

"For debugging and local development purposes, the example exports
telemetry to the console. After you have finished setting up manual
instrumentation, you need to configure an appropriate exporter to
[export the app's telemetry data](/docs/languages/net/exporters/) to one or more
telemetry backends."

    .WithMetrics(metrics => metrics
        .AddMeter(serviceName)
        .AddConsoleExporter());

builder.Logging.AddOpenTelemetry(options => options
    .SetResourceBuilder(ResourceBuilder.CreateDefault().AddService(
        serviceName: serviceName,
        serviceVersion: serviceVersion))
    .AddConsoleExporter());

builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();

app.MapControllers();

app.Run();

```

If initializing the OpenTelemetry SDK for a console app,
add the following code at the beginning of your program, during any important startup operations.

```csharp
using OpenTelemetry.Resources;
using OpenTelemetry.Trace;

> using OpenTelemetry.Logs;

Reviewer 3: Alphabetic ordering

        }
    }
}
```

Create the app file `DiceController.cs` and add the following code to it:

```csharp
/*DiceController.cs*/
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
using System.Net;

namespace otel
{
    public class DiceController : ControllerBase
    {
        private ILogger<DiceController> logger;

        public DiceController(ILogger<DiceController> logger)
        {
            this.logger = logger;
        }

        [HttpGet("/rolldice")]
        public List<int> RollDice(string player, int? rolls)
        {
            if(!rolls.HasValue)
            {
                logger.LogError("Missing rolls parameter");
                throw new HttpRequestException("Missing rolls parameter", null, HttpStatusCode.BadRequest);
            }
                
            var result = new Dice(1, 6).rollTheDice(rolls.Value);

            if (string.IsNullOrEmpty(player))
            {
                logger.LogInformation("Anonymous player is rolling the dice: {result}", result);
            }
            else
            {
                logger.LogInformation("{player} is rolling the dice: {result}", player, result);
            }

            return result;
        }
    }
}
```

> Replace the content of the program.cs file with the following code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replace the content of the Program.cs file with the following code:
```

```csharp
var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();

app.MapControllers();

app.Run();
```

To ensure that it is working, run the application with the following command and
open <http://localhost:8080/rolldice?rolls=12> in your web browser:

```sh

> dotnet build

Reviewer: nit : build is not required explicitly as run will do it automatically.

dotnet run
```

You should get a list of 12 numbers in your browser window, for example:

```text
[5,6,5,3,6,1,2,5,4,4,2,4]
```

## Manual instrumentation setup

### Dependencies

Install the following OpenTelemetry NuGet packages:

[OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console)

[OpenTelemetry.Extensions.Hosting](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OpenTelemetry.Extensions.Hosting)

```sh
dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console
dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Extensions.Hosting
```

> For ASP.NET Core-based applications, also install the AspNetCore instrumentation package

Reviewer: this is not used in the rest of the code... missed to add?

Author: Yes, I forgot to include it in the "Initialize the SDK" section.

I initially thought it wasnt needed but I noticed the code couldnt generate traces until I included the package.

        .AddSource(serviceName)
        .AddConsoleExporter())
    .WithMetrics(metrics => metrics
        .AddMeter(serviceName)
        .AddConsoleExporter());

builder.Logging.AddOpenTelemetry(options => options
    .SetResourceBuilder(ResourceBuilder.CreateDefault().AddService(
        serviceName: serviceName,
        serviceVersion: serviceVersion))
    .AddConsoleExporter());

builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();

app.MapControllers();

app.Run();

```

If initializing the OpenTelemetry SDK for a console app,
add the following code at the beginning of your program, during any important startup operations.

```csharp
using OpenTelemetry.Resources;
using OpenTelemetry.Trace;

//...

var serviceName = "MyServiceName";
var serviceVersion = "1.0.0";

var tracerProvider = Sdk.CreateTracerProviderBuilder()
    .AddSource(serviceName)
    .ConfigureResource(resource =>
        resource.AddService(
          serviceName: serviceName,
          serviceVersion: serviceVersion))
    .AddConsoleExporter()
    .Build();

var meterProvider = Sdk.CreateMeterProviderBuilder()
    .AddMeter(serviceName)
    .AddConsoleExporter()
    .Build();

> //...

Reviewer: logs omitted intentionally?

Author: I missed it. 

Thanks for pointing it out 🙂

    ActivityKind.Internal,
    name: "activity-with-links",
    links: links);
```

For more details how to read context from remote processes, see
[Context Propagation](#context-propagation).

### Set Activity status

{{% docs/languages/span-status-preamble %}}

A [status](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#span-status) can be set on a
[span](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans), typically used to specify that a
span has not completed successfully - `SpanStatus.Error`. 

By default, all spans are `Unset`, which means a span completed without error. The `Ok` status is reserved for when you need to explicitly mark a span as successful rather than stick with the default of Unset (i.e., “without error”).

The status can be set at any time before the span is finished.

It can be a good idea to record exceptions when they happen. It's recommended to
do this in conjunction with
[setting span status](/docs/specs/otel/trace/api/#set-status).

```csharp
private int rollOnce()
{
    int result;
    var childActivity = MyActivitySource.StartActivity("rollOnce");

    try
    {
        result = Random.Shared.Next(min, max + 1);
    }
    catch (Exception ex)
    {

>         childActivity?.SetStatus(ActivityStatusCode.Error, ex.Message);

Reviewer: is it recommended to set status description as ex.Message?

Author: ohh no. 
It is probably not even a good idea 🙂.

### Dependencies {#example-app-dependencies}

- [.NET SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet) 6+

### Create and launch an HTTP Server

To highlight the difference between instrumenting a library and a standalone
app, split out the dice rolling into a library file, which then will be
imported as a dependency by the app file.

Create the library file named `Dice.cs` and add the following code to it:

```csharp
/*Dice.cs*/
namespace otel
{
    public class Dice
    {
        private int min;
        private int max;

        public Dice(int min, int max)
        {
            this.min = min;
            this.max = max;
        }

        public List<int> rollTheDice(int rolls)
        {
            List<int> results = new List<int>();

            for (int i = 0; i < rolls; i++)
            {
                results.Add(rollOnce());
            }
            
            return results;
        }

        private int rollOnce()
        {
            return Random.Shared.Next(min, max + 1);
        }
    }
}
```

Create the app file `DiceController.cs` and add the following code to it:

```csharp
/*DiceController.cs*/
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
using System.Net;

> namespace otel

Reviewer 3: Do we need a namespace here? (what value does it provide to the user)
If we need a namespace, consider following the .NET convention and use upper camel case.

Reviewer 2: consider https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/proposals/csharp-10.0/file-scoped-namespaces

It reduces nesting.

If you prefer to use OpenTelemetry APIs instead of `System.Diagnostics` APIs,
you can refer to the [OpenTelemetry API Shim docs for tracing](../shim).

## Example app preparation {#example-app}

This page uses a modified version of the example app from
[Getting Started](/docs/languages/net/getting-started/) to help you learn
about manual instrumentation.

You don't have to use the example app: if you want to instrument your own app or
library, follow the instructions here to adapt the process to your own code.

### Dependencies {#example-app-dependencies}

- [.NET SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet) 6+

### Create and launch an HTTP Server

To highlight the difference between instrumenting a _library_ and a standalone
_app_, split out the dice rolling into a _library file_, which then will be
imported as a dependency by the _app file_.

> Create the _library file_ named `Dice.cs` and add the following code to it:

Reviewer 4: Please remove all the italics/emphasis.

        }
    }
}
```

Create the _app file_ `DiceController.cs` and add the following code to it:

```csharp
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
using System.Net;

namespace otel
{
    public class DiceController : ControllerBase
    {
        private ILogger<DiceController> logger;

        public DiceController(ILogger<DiceController> logger)
        {
            this.logger = logger;
        }

        [HttpGet("/rolldice")]
        public List<int> RollDice(string player, int? rolls)
        {
            if(!rolls.HasValue)
            {
                logger.LogError("Missing rolls parameter");
                throw new HttpRequestException("Missing rolls parameter", null, HttpStatusCode.BadRequest);
            }
                
            var result = new Dice(1, 6).rollTheDice(rolls.Value);

            if (string.IsNullOrEmpty(player))
            {
                logger.LogInformation("Anonymous player is rolling the dice: {result}", result);
            }
            else
            {
                logger.LogInformation("{player} is rolling the dice: {result}", player, result);
            }

            return result;
        }
    }
}
```

> Replace the program.cs content with the following code:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Replace the content of the program.cs file with the following code:
```

```csharp
var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();

app.MapControllers();

app.Run();
```

To ensure that it is working, run the application with the following command and
open <http://localhost:8080/rolldice?rolls=12> in your web browser:

```sh
dotnet build
dotnet run
```

You should get a list of 12 numbers in your browser window, for example:

```text
[5,6,5,3,6,1,2,5,4,4,2,4]
```

## Manual instrumentation setup

### Dependencies

> Install the [OpenTelemetry API and SDK NuGet packages](https://www.nuget.org/profiles/OpenTelemetry):

Reviewer: https://www.nuget.org/profiles/OpenTelemetry -- this link is not really helpful here. Please point to the specific packages.

```sh

> dotnet add package OpenTelemetry

Reviewer: `OpenTelemetry` is not required as it is brought automatically.

dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console
dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Extensions.Hosting
```

### Initialize the SDK

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library,

> **skip this step**. {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer: not clear what is "this step" referring to. Lets point to the next concrete step instead.

Reviewer 4: Also, no bold styling, please.

Before any other module in your application is loaded, you must initialize the SDK. 

> If you fail to initialize the SDK or initialize it too late, no-op

Reviewer: This may not be true.. If the initialization is late, then at that point onwards instrumentations work.

implementations will be provided to any library that acquires a tracer or meter from the API.

> To intialize the sdks, replace the program.cs content with the following code: 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To initialize the SKDs, replace the content of the program.cs file with the
following code: 
```

using OpenTelemetry.Metrics;
using OpenTelemetry.Resources;
using OpenTelemetry.Trace;

var serviceName = "dice-server";
var serviceVersion = "1.0.0";

var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.Services.AddOpenTelemetry()
    .ConfigureResource(resource => resource.AddService(
        serviceName: serviceName, 
        serviceVersion: serviceVersion))
    .WithTracing(tracing => tracing
        .AddSource(serviceName)
        .AddConsoleExporter())
    .WithMetrics(metrics => metrics
        .AddMeter(serviceName)
        .AddConsoleExporter());

builder.Logging.AddOpenTelemetry(options => options
    .SetResourceBuilder(ResourceBuilder.CreateDefault().AddService(
        serviceName: serviceName,
        serviceVersion: serviceVersion))
    .AddConsoleExporter());

builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();

app.MapControllers();

app.Run();

```

For debugging and local development purposes, the following example exports
telemetry to the console. After you have finished setting up manual
instrumentation, you need to configure an appropriate exporter to
[export the app's telemetry data](/docs/languages/net/exporters/) to one or more

> telemetry backends.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
telemetry back ends.
```

> The example also sets up the mandatory SDK default attribute `service.name`,
> which holds the logical name of the service, and the optional (but highly
> encouraged!) attribute `service.version`, which holds the version of the service
> API or implementation.
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The example also sets up the mandatory SDK default attribute `service.name`,
which holds the logical name of the service, and the optional, but highly
encouraged, attribute `service.version`, which holds the version of the service
API or implementation.
```

Alternative methods exist for setting up resource attributes. For more
information, see [Resources](/docs/languages/net/resources/).

To verify your code, build and run the app:

```sh
dotnet build
dotnet run
```

> This basic setup has no effect on your app yet. You need to add code for

Reviewer: "no effect" is not true for Logs. Asp.Net Core components could be logging and they are now sent via OpenTelemetry.

    .AddConsoleExporter()
    .Build();

var meterProvider = Sdk.CreateMeterProviderBuilder()
    .AddMeter(serviceName)
    .AddConsoleExporter()
    .Build();

var loggerFactory = LoggerFactory.Create(builder =>
{
    builder.AddOpenTelemetry(logging =>
    {
        logging.AddConsoleExporter();
    });
});

//...

```

For debugging and local development purposes, the example exports
telemetry to the console. After you have finished setting up manual
instrumentation, you need to configure an appropriate exporter to
[export the app's telemetry data](/docs/languages/net/exporters/) to one or more
telemetry backends.

The example also sets up the mandatory SDK default attribute `service.name`,
which holds the logical name of the service, and the optional, but highly
encouraged, attribute `service.version`, which holds the version of the service
API or implementation.
Alternative methods exist for setting up resource attributes. For more
information, see [Resources](/docs/languages/net/resources/).

To verify your code, build and run the app:

```sh
dotnet build
dotnet run
```

## Traces

### Initialize Tracing

> {{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library, you dont need to initialize a TraceProvider. {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library, you don't need to initialize a TraceProvider. {{% /alert %}}
```

}

```

And second, in the library file `Dice.cs`:

```csharp

using System.Diagnostics;

public class Dice
{
    public static readonly ActivitySource MyActivitySource = new("Dice.Lib", "1.0.0");
    
    private int min;
    private int max;

    public Dice(int min, int max)
    {
        this.min = min;
        this.max = max;
    }

    //...
}

```

### Create Activities

Now that you have [activitySources](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer) initialized, you can create [activities](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans).

The code below illustrates how to create an activity.

```csharp
public List<int> rollTheDice(int rolls)
{
    var activity = MyActivitySource.StartActivity("rollTheDice");
    List<int> results = new List<int>();

    for (int i = 0; i < rolls; i++)
    {
        results.Add(rollOnce());
    }

    activity?.Stop();
    return results;
}

```
Note, that it’s required to `Stop()` the activity, otherwise it will not be exported.

If you followed the instructions using the [example app](#example-app) up to
this point, you can copy the code above in your library file `Dice.cs`. You
should now be able to see activities/spans emitted from your app.

> Start your app as follows, and then send it requests by visiting http://localhost:8080/rolldice?rolls=12 with your browser or curl.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Start your app as follows, and then send it requests by visiting <http://localhost:8080/rolldice?rolls=12> with your browser or curl.
```

    .AddConsoleExporter()
    .Build();

> var meterProvider = Sdk.CreateMeterProviderBuilder()

Reviewer: since we are removing "using" keyword from here, we need to explicitly dispose() at the end of the application, else metrics won't be flushed to console! (Similar concern for logs/traces too, though logs/traces will still show up in console even without dispose, but we should show the right thing that works across all exporters.)
in short - please add explicit .Dispose() call on meterProvider, tracerProvider, loggerFactory at the end of the application.

Anywhere in your application where you write manual tracing code should configure an
[`ActivitySource`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer), which will be how you
trace operations with [`Activity`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans)
elements.

For example:

```csharp

public static class Telemetry
{
    //...

    public static readonly ActivitySource MyActivitySource = new("name", "version");

    //...
}
```
The values of name and version should uniquely identify the Instrumentation Scope, such as the package, module or class name. While the name is required, the version is still recommended despite being optional.

It’s generally recommended to define `ActivitySource` once per app/service that is been instrumented, but you can instantiate several `ActivitySource`s if that suits your scenario

In the case of the example app, there are two places where the `ActivitySource` will be instantiated with an appropriate Instrumentation Scope:

First, in the application file `DiceController.cs`:

```csharp
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
using System.Diagnostics;
using System.Net;

public class DiceController : ControllerBase
{
    private ILogger<DiceController> logger;
    

>     public static readonly ActivitySource MyActivitySource = new("Dice.Server", "1.0.0");

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure this sort of approach is what we should be promoting. The ActivitySource should be shared at an assembly level, not at a controller/class level.

Author: Hello @martinjt I am not totally clear on what you mean here.
Do you mean the ActivitySource should be initialized in Program.cs and then passed in here?

Reviewer: It'd nice to avoid creating new and new ActivitySource per controller/class, and instead use a single one throughout. Unless there is a reason to separate it out, like enabling/disabling telemetry per ActivitySource. For this doc, it is best to use a single ActivitySource.

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/examples/AspNetCore Shows one way of doing this in an asp.net core application.

    public DiceController(ILogger<DiceController> logger)
    {
        this.logger = logger;
    }

    //...
}

```

And second, in the library file `Dice.cs`:

```csharp

using System.Diagnostics;

public class Dice
{
    public static readonly ActivitySource MyActivitySource = new("Dice.Lib", "1.0.0");
    
    private int min;
    private int max;

    public Dice(int min, int max)
    {
        this.min = min;
        this.max = max;
    }

    //...
}

```

### Create Activities

Now that you have [activitySources](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer) initialized, you can create [activities](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans).

The code below illustrates how to create an activity.

```csharp
public List<int> rollTheDice(int rolls)
{

>     var activity = MyActivitySource.StartActivity("rollTheDice");

Reviewer: I'd also suggest to add a note here saying something like:
The example here is creating a new Span for demonstration purposes only. It is recommended to create Spans, only if it is doing something worth measuring independently. Too many spans makes it harder to visualize in tools like Jaeger.

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/examples/AspNetCore/Controllers/WeatherForecastController.cs#L45-L52 - These wording maybe borrowed.

    List<int> results = new List<int>();

    for (int i = 0; i < rolls; i++)
    {
        results.Add(rollOnce());
    }

    activity?.Stop();
    return results;
}

```

> Note, that it’s required to `Stop()` the activity, otherwise it will not be exported.

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure I'd put this, it's more accepted practice to us a using statement that will automatically dispose of the activity and therefore send it.

Anywhere in your application where you write manual tracing code should configure an
[`ActivitySource`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer), which will be how you
trace operations with [`Activity`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans)
elements.

For example:

```csharp

public static class Telemetry
{
    //...

    public static readonly ActivitySource MyActivitySource = new("name", "version");

    //...
}
```
The values of name and version should uniquely identify the Instrumentation Scope, such as the package, module or class name. While the name is required, the version is still recommended despite being optional.

It’s generally recommended to define `ActivitySource` once per app/service that is been instrumented, but you can instantiate several `ActivitySource`s if that suits your scenario

In the case of the example app, the `ActivitySource` will be instantiated in the `program.cs` and then the same instance will be used in `DiceController.cs` and `Dice.cs`

First we instantiate the activitySource in the `program.cs`:

```csharp { hl_lines=["2-3"]}

// Register the ActivitySource as a singleton to have a single instance of activitySource across the application

> builder.Services.AddSingleton<ActivitySource>(new ActivitySource(serviceName, serviceVersion));

Reviewer: this should not be done (`ActivitySource` is not a class defined/owned by this app, and should not be added to DI without wrapping inside a custom class on your own.)

See example from here : https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/examples/AspNetCore/Program.cs

Author: I ll update to include a new instrumentation class to wrap the ActivitySource

If a `TracerProvider` is not created, the OpenTelemetry APIs for tracing will
use a no-op implementation and fail to generate data.

If you followed the instructions to [initialize the SDK](#initialize-the-sdk)
above, you have a `TracerProvider` setup for you already. You can continue with
[acquiring a tracer](#acquiring-a-tracer).

### Setting up an ActivitySource

Anywhere in your application where you write manual tracing code should configure an
[`ActivitySource`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer), which will be how you
trace operations with [`Activity`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans)
elements.

For example:

```csharp

public static class Telemetry
{
    //...

    public static readonly ActivitySource MyActivitySource = new("name", "version");

    //...
}
```
The values of name and version should uniquely identify the Instrumentation Scope, such as the package, module or class name. While the name is required, the version is still recommended despite being optional.

It’s generally recommended to define `ActivitySource` once per app/service that is been instrumented, but you can instantiate several `ActivitySource`s if that suits your scenario

> In the case of the example app, we will create a new file `Instrumentation.cs` as a custom type to hold reference for the ActivitySource. 

Reviewer: it looks like there is already a `public static class Telemetry` shown above. That must be removed if going with `instrumentation.cs`?

    public Instrumentation()
    {
        this.ActivitySource = new ActivitySource(ActivitySourceName, ActivitySourceVersion);
    }

    public ActivitySource ActivitySource { get; }

    public void Dispose()
    {
        this.ActivitySource.Dispose();
    }
}
```

Then we will update the `Program.cs` to add the Instrument object as a dependency injection:

```csharp 
//...

// Register the ActivitySource as a singleton in the DI container.
// Create a service to expose the ActivitySource Instruments.
builder.Services.AddSingleton<Instrumentation>();

builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();

app.MapControllers();

app.Run();

```

In the application file `DiceController.cs` we then reference that activitySource instance:

```csharp
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
using System.Diagnostics;
using System.Net;

public class DiceController : ControllerBase
{
    private ILogger<DiceController> logger;

    private ActivitySource activitySource;

     public DiceController(ILogger<DiceController> logger, Instrumentation instrumentation)
    {
        this.logger = logger;
        this.activitySource = instrumentation.ActivitySource;
    }

    //...
}

```

> The same activitySource is also passed to the library file `Dice.cs`:

Reviewer: I think the code to do this is missing? You need to add something like new Dice(activitySource,min,max).

```csharp

using System.Diagnostics;

public class Dice
{
    public ActivitySource activitySource;
    private int min;
    private int max;

>     public Dice(int min, int max, ActivitySource activitySource)

Reviewer: not able to see who is injecting ActivitySource to this constructor? Or is that instantiated manually? Can you add the code also?

Author: Added it above
